On my second day at the 2022 math REU program at the University of Michigan I attended an REU picnic, and was extremely disappointed to meet only two other women, and 15 or so men (over the next few days, I would meet one more woman in the program, and at least a dozen more men). When I expressed my disappointment with the abhorrent lack of diversity in the program to a close friend, he told me, “well, at least you know you weren’t a diversity recruit.”

At first the comment seemed sweet— true, if I was just accepted to the program to help get the female-male ratio up, then there would certainly be many more girls alongside me. But after sitting with the comment for a moment it dawned on me that the thought of me being a “diversity recruit” had actually never entered my mind. Truly, I had all of the qualifications for the project: my research mentor was looking for someone with a strong background in algebra and preferred the student to also have background in algebraic geometry, Lie theory, and representation theory, all of which I had taken courses in, many at the graduate level. I have a perfect GPA, have previously conducted research (with both a journal publication and a citation!), am confident in the quality of my letters of recommendation to the program, and wrote a personal statement I was very proud of. Although I have spent a majority of my academic career believing that opportunities I have been granted are only because I’m good at convincing people that I’m starter than I am, this was truly not one of those moments. 

My friend certainly had no malintent when he made his comment. When I called him out for implying that women in math programs are automatically diversity recruits, he elaborated that he thought I had previously mentioned that I didn’t deserve to be at my REU. Regardless of its intent, the comment (and even more so, the experience I had at that day’s picnic, when I realized that so few of the people I will be spending the next two months with look and think like me) got me thinking all over again about being a woman in math and what that means to me.

For sure, I am not the first to give my musings on this topic, and I need only read a few of these blogs to understand that much of what I want to say has already been expressed by those far more articulate and experienced than I. But the fact that such experiences are so universal is a testament to their truth, so it's only fitting (maybe even pressing, important) that I give my own two cents. 

The REU I attended last summer at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities had 7 male participants and 7 female participants. This even split was no doubt intentional, and I think is one of the reasons our group got along so well and was able to both conduct really good research and have a really fun time overall. Without seeing the list of applicants I am confident that there were far more men who applied to the program than women, such that it is easier to get into the program if you are a highly qualified female rather than a highly qualified male, based on a pure numbers game. The key term here is highly qualified. None of the women at my program deserved to be there any less than the men— every participant at the REU had worked hard in college, taken difficult classes, was heavily involved at their university, and had a drive and willingness to learn. Many highly qualified men might find it upsetting that (highly qualified) women are “taking their spot” at these prestigious and very competitive summer research programs, and I do believe that such feelings are valid and rarely come from a place of misogyny. I would be foolish to believe that it hasn’t often worked to my advantage to be a woman pursuing a field dominated by men, and while this advantage may be unfair (in the sense that it is granted to me on the basis of my sex, something I have no control over), it is an important one. 

It doesn’t really hit me until I find myself in situations where I am one of the only (or truly the only) women in some math setting that representation really does matter, and it ought to be a top priority of every university, research program, and company. Diversity in gender, race, and ability makes for welcoming and inclusive environments, which (besides being good all on their own) are phenomenal for bringing about progress and new ideas. It promotes collaboration over competition, allows for important, typically silenced voices to be heard, and overall just makes mathematical communities better. If math was done in solitude then none of this would matter. But every decent mathematician knows that ideas without effective communication are nothing, that sharing conjectures and proofs across the world are how theories get built, and that shutting people out of such networks of discovery (such as by implicitly devaluing the work of women) is a surefire way to slow progress. Why the University of Michigan failed to see this when selecting members to their program this summer baffles me, and I really wish they had taken it into consideration. It certainly would have made me a lot happier and prouder to be spending my summer at their university. 

These feelings come at an especially important time in my life, when my senior year of college is fast approaching and the decision for what I’m going to do “in the real world” is ever pressing. None of my male friends thinking of applying to PhD programs seem to deal with any of the anxieties I constantly face— will people at my program take me seriously? Will a professor want to be my advisor? Will there be people who look like me, who value what I value? While math is really beautiful and has been an object of fascination for me for my entire life, it is also extremely challenging, and the added anxiety that comes along with being underrepresented is at times overbearing. When I shout out the answer in a class where I am the only female student, I don’t want to feel like saying the wrong thing somehow confirms the notion that I do not belong there. When I get an interview for a research program my classmate gets rejected from, I do not want to be told that it is because I am a girl. But alas, these things happen. All I can hope is to surround myself with people who support me in my pursuits and treat me as someone capable of doing challenging, meaningful work. 

All of that is to say that I am extremely fortunate to be constantly surrounded by people who do just that. I’m so grateful to have the best advisor, several (!!) incredible female math friends, and many many male classmates and colleagues who, although will never understand what it’s like to be a female in math, listen to me endlessly and sympathize with me greatly. This field can be extremely grueling and frustrating, at times making you feel like you know absolutely nothing at all, but a good community makes it all worth it. Thank you to everyone who has been a part of mine :D <3 
